docs(api): refactor and rewrite Complex Commands (#13384)
OpenTrons/opentrons-api: api/docs/v2/complex_commands/sources_destinations.rst

:og:description: How the Opentrons Python API moves liquids between wells when using complex commands.

.. _complex-source-dest:

************************
Sources and Destinations
************************

Complex commands require both ``source`` and ``dest`` (destination) arguments, in order to move liquid from one well or group of wells to another. This contrasts with the :ref:`v2-atomic-commands` :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.aspirate` and :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.dispense`, which only operate in a single location.

For example, a simple transfer between two wells on a plate could specify::

    pipette.transfer(
        volume=100,
        source=plate["A1"],
        dest=plate["A2"],
    )

.. versionadded:: 2.0

> This page covers how :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.transfer` , :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.distribute`, and :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.consolidate` operate on source and destination wells. Each method has its own :ref:`restrictions on sources and destinations <source-dest-args>`. They also aspirate and dispense in different :ref:`patterns <complex-transfer-patterns>`, which you can :ref:`optimize for different use cases <complex-optimizing-patterns>`.

Reviewer: Hey Ed, as a style issue, I thought we informally settled on this style for method names in docs:

- 1st mention: Use the full, formal name — `:py:meth:InstrumentContext.distribute`
- 2nd mention: Shorten with the tilde — `:py:meth:~.InstrumentContext.distribute`
- 3rd/subsequent: Monospace `distribute()`

As these 3 methods all appear on this page here for the first time in this paragraph, shouldn't this text appear as follows:

- `InstrumentContext.transfer`
- `InstrumentContext.distribute`
- `InstrumentContext.consolidate`

Though there's an argument to be made that repeating `InstrumentContext` 3 times in 1 paragraph might be too much repetition.

Author: yeah, it would be fine to use the long versions here. not too cluttered.

Author: ehh, this made some really ugly line breaks. i'm going to list them in full on the landing page though.

Reviewer: yeah, if using the full, formal name affects line breaks and formatting, then we should fall back to the shorter version.

> Complex commands require both ``source`` and ``dest`` (destination) arguments, in order to move liquid from one well or group of wells to another. This contrasts with the :ref:`v2-atomic-commands` :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.aspirate` and :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.dispense`, which only operate in a single location.
> 
> For example, a simple transfer between two wells on a plate could specify::
> 
>     pipette.transfer(
>         volume=100,
>         source=plate["A1"],
>         dest=plate["A2"],
>     )
> 
> .. versionadded:: 2.0
> 
> This page covers how :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.transfer` , :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.distribute`, and :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.consolidate` operate on source and destination wells. Each method has its own :ref:`restrictions on sources and destinations <source-dest-args>`. They also aspirate and dispense in different :ref:`patterns <complex-transfer-patterns>`, which you can :ref:`optimize for different use cases <complex-optimizing-patterns>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.transfer`, :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.distribute`, and :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.consolidate` methods are part of the family of complex liquid handling commands. These methods require ``source`` and ``destination`` arguments to move liquid from one well, or group of wells, to another. By contrast, the simpler building block commands, like :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.aspirate` and :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.dispense`, only operate in a single location. For example, this code snippet shows a simple transfer between two wells on a plate::

    pipette.transfer(
        volume=100,
        source=plate["A1"],
        dest=plate["A2"],
    )

.. versionadded:: 2.0

.. suggest excluding text links from the remaining text

This page also looks at the restrictions on sources and destinations for these methods, how to aspirate and dispense in patterns, and how to optimize patterns for different use cases.
```

.. _source-dest-args:

> ``source`` and ``dest`` Arguments
> =================================
> 
> :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.transfer` is the most versatile complex liquid handling function, having the fewest restrictions on what wells it can operate on. You will most likely want to use transfer commands in a majority of cases.
> 
> Certain liquid handling cases focus on moving liquid to or from a single well. :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.distribute` limits its source to a single well, while :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.consolidate` limits its destination to a single well. Distribute commands also make  changes to liquid-handling behavior to improve the accuracy of dispensing.
> 
> These restrictions and behaviors are summarized as follows:

Reviewer: I think this section title and beginning text could set the topic expectation sooner and make the topic stronger/more clear. Also, let's consider changing the section title by removing the `code` elements in favor of words/text.

```suggestion

Source and Destination Arguments
================================

As noted above, the :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.transfer`, :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.distribute`, and :py:meth:`~.InstrumentContext.consolidate` methods *require* ``source`` and ``dest`` (destination) arguments to aspirate and dispense liquid. However, each method handles liquid sources and destinations differently. Understanding how complex commands work with source and destination wells are essential to making effective use of these methods.

The ``transfer()`` method is the most versatile complex liquid handling function. It has the fewest restrictions on what wells it can operate on. You're most likely to use this method in many of your protocols.

The ``distribute()`` and ``consolidate()`` methods are useful when your liquid handling use cases require moving liquid to or from a single well. For example, ``distribute()`` can only draw liquid a single source well, while ``consolidate()`` can only distribute liquid to a single destination well. Distribute commands also make changes to the robot's liquid-handling behavior that help improve dispensing accuracy.

The following table summarizes the source and destination capabilities of each method.
```

And then continue on to the table. More to come. All hands went kind of long.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Method
     - Accepted wells
   * - ``transfer()``
     - 
       - **Source:** Any number of wells.
       - **Destination:** Any number of wells.
       - The larger group of wells must be evenly divisible by the smaller group.
   * - ``distribute()``
     - 
       - **Source:** Exactly one well.
       - **Destination:** Any number of wells.
   * - ``consolidate()``
     - 
       - **Source:** Any number of wells.
       - **Destination:** Exactly one well.

> Singleton wells can be passed by themselves or as a list with one item: ``source=plate['A1']`` and ``source=[plate['A1']]`` are equivalent.

Reviewer: Optional, for consideration.

Word choice:  "singleton" ?  

I understand it yet wonder if it might be easier to write "a single well" or "single wells" or "individual wells".

Author: apparently in Python `singleton` only means a one-member tuple. so…yeah, wrong word choice.

    
The section on :ref:`many-to-many transfers <many-to-many>` below covers how ``transfer()`` works when specifying sources and destinations of different sizes. However, if they don't meet the even divisibility requirement, the API will raise an error. You can work around such situations by making multiple calls to ``transfer()`` in sequence or by using a :ref:`complex-list-volumes` to skip certain wells.

For distributing and consolidating, the API will not raise an error if you use a list of wells as the argument that is limited to exactly one well. Instead, the API will ignore everything except the first well in the list. For example, the following command will only aspirate from well A1::

    pipette.distribute(
        volume=100,
        source=[plate["A1"], plate["A2"]],  # A2 ignored
        dest=plate.columns()[1],
    )

On the other hand, a transfer command with the same arguments would aspirate from both A1 and A2. The next section examines the exact order of aspiration and dispensing for all three methods.

.. _complex-transfer-patterns:

> Transfer Patterns

Reviewer: I just have to say this entire part is a _huge_ improvement over the current docs. HUGE!

    pipette.transfer(50, plate["A1"], plate.columns()[3][:3])
    pipette.transfer(50, plate["A2"], plate.columns()[3][3:6])
    pipette.transfer(50, plate["A3"], plate.columns()[3][6:])
    
Finally, be aware of the ordering of source and destination lists when constructing them with :ref:`well-accessor-methods`. For example, at first glance this code may appear to take liquid from each well in the first row of a plate and move it to each of the other wells in the same column::

    pipette.transfer(
        volume=20,
        source=plate.rows()[0],
        dest=plate.rows()[1:],
    )
    
However, because the well ordering of :py:meth:`.Labware.rows` goes *across* the plate instead of *down* the plate, liquid from A1 will be dispensed in B1–B7, liquid from A2 will be dispensed in B8–C2, etc. The intended task is probably better accomplished by repeating transfers in a ``for`` loop::

    for i in range(12):        
        pipette.transfer(
            volume=20,
            source=plate.rows()[0][i],
            dest=plate.columns()[i][1:],
        )

Here the repeat index ``i`` picks out:

    - The individual well in the first row, for the source.

>     - The corresponding column, which is sliced to form the destination.

Reviewer: Great use of bullets here. Loves me some bullets.

.. _complex-optimizing-patterns:

Optimizing Patterns
-------------------

> Choosing the right complex command optimizes gantry movement and ultimately can save time in your protocol. For example, say you want to take liquid from a reservoir and put 50 µL in each well of the first row of a plate. You could use ``transfer()``, like this::

Reviewer: Suggest making less of a promise here with "and ultimately can save time in your protocol."

Instead, recommend using something like "help" like this:

> Choosing the right complex command optimizes gantry movement and helps save time in your protocol.

or even this:

> Choosing the right complex command optimizes gantry movements and improves protocol efficiency.
